Systems Book Page Rewrite (#2380)
bevyengine/bevy-website: content/learn/book/control-flow/systems.md

status = 'hidden'
+++

**Systems** are the primary way that Bevy applications interact with the [`World`].
When you need to perform regularly scheduled logic, a [`System`] will usually be the best tool for the job.
As the third pillar of the ECS model, systems give us the power to operate over a large number of similar entities in an efficient way.

> Since components of a given type are laid out beside each other in memory, we get good [cache locality] when operating on them in a batched fashion.

Reviewer: There is an argument here that this should be "Entities with the same sets of components" / some other alluding to archetypes but I think this is a pedagogically sound simplification.

Systems in Bevy are any Rust function where every argument implements the [`SystemParam`] trait.
Some common parameters you'll use and see in Bevy are [`Query`], [`Res`], [`ResMut`], [`MessageReader`], [`MessageWriter`], [`Local`] and [`Commands`].
Each of these is covered in their own chapters throughout this book, but we'll be using them here to help explain the concepts that directly tie in to systems.

```rust

> // A simple system accessing the Commands, Query, and Resource parameters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// A simple system accessing the Commands, Query, and ResMut parameters.
```

fn bevy_system(
    // Our System's System Parameters.
    mut commands: Commands,
    query: Query<&Component>,
    mut res: ResMut<Resource>
) {
    // Using our parameters in a System.
    for item in query.iter() {
        let new_entity = commands.spawn(BundleOfComponents).id();
        
        res.entity_field.push(new_entity);
    }

> }

Reviewer 2: `Component` and `Resource` would likely conflict with the trait names in an actual application

Systems can also be run on demand, via a "one-shot" pattern.
This is an extremely flexible tool, allowing you to execute arbitrary logic on the world in an ergonomic way whenever you please.
One-shot systems are particularly useful for testing, handling callbacks in UI, creating scripted events or when architecting turn-based games.

As discussed above, systems have their own state.
When working with one-shot systems, entities are spawned to store this information.
The [`Entity`] identifier for each system are stored in a [`SystemId`].
A `SystemId` can be registered for future use by [`World::register_system`].
After the system is registered, we can use [`World::run_system`] and pass in the `SystemId` value to run the system at a given point.

```rust
// This System will register and then run two One-shot Systems.
fn register_one_shot_systems(mut world: &mut World) {
    // Register two One-shot Systems.
    let some_system_id = world.register_system(one_shot_system);
    let another_system_id = world.register_system(one_shot_system_with_input);
    
    // Run the first One-shot System. 
    world.run_system(some_system_id);
    // Run the second One-shot System.

>     world.run_system_with(another_system_id, 5);

Reviewer: Should maybe show (might be too in the weeds to mention directly) how running these returns a result? Even if there's no "output" data due to them being run from systemid.

Spawning large numbers of entities at once is one example of this, as there is no additional overhead incurred from *queueing* these changes like there is when using `Commands`.
They are also extremely useful for unusually complex game logic or control flow, as any data, and can be used to immediately run one-shot systems or schedules.

That said, exclusive systems are harder to schedule, both because they prevent any other system from running at the same time and because their scheduling order is ambiguous with any other systems in the same schedule. Remember that all systems in a specific `Schedule` are ran in parallel by default unless explicitly ordered.

## System Input and Output

Systems can optionally take input, and produce output, via the [`In`] and [`Out`] generics on the various system traits
such as [`System`].
The application of this is simplest to understand in the context of one-shot systems.

```rust
fn call_system(mut world: &mut World) {
    // Call the one-shot system with an input value of 42.
    let system_value = world.run_system_once_with(one_shot_system_with_input, 42);

>     // After going through the one-shot system, system value will equal 44.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // After going through the one-shot system, system value will equal Ok(44).
```

That said, exclusive systems are harder to schedule, both because they prevent any other system from running at the same time and because their scheduling order is ambiguous with any other systems in the same schedule. Remember that all systems in a specific `Schedule` are ran in parallel by default unless explicitly ordered.

## System Input and Output

Systems can optionally take input, and produce output, via the [`In`] and [`Out`] generics on the various system traits
such as [`System`].
The application of this is simplest to understand in the context of one-shot systems.

```rust
fn call_system(mut world: &mut World) {
    // Call the one-shot system with an input value of 42.
    let system_value: Result<usize, _> = world.run_system_once_with(one_shot_system_with_input, 42);
    // After going through the one-shot system, system_value will equal `Ok<44>`.
    println!("System value: {}", system_value);
}

fn one_shot_system_with_input(In(input): In<usize>) -> usize {
    // `input` is passed into the system with an `In` generic value.
    input += 2;
    // This function returns a usize value, and is thus our `Out` value.
    input

> }

Reviewer 3: The `input` binding needs to be marked `mut` for this to compile (and I think not doing so here is a tiny bit clearer).
```suggestion
fn one_shot_system_with_input(In(input): In<usize>) -> usize {
    // `input` is passed into the system with an `In` generic value.
    // This function returns a usize value, which is thus our `Out` value.
    input + 2
}
```

When a system is ran, the requested data is automatically fetched from the `World`. 
Other systems are prevented from accessing the requested data if their access would violate the rules of the borrow checker. 
The prime directive of Rust still applies: accessing `World` data can be mutable *or* shared, but never both at once.

We can see this in action when using multiple systems.
If two systems access non-overlapping parts of the world they can run at the same time. 
In the example below, both systems would be able to run in parallel since they do not access the same data.

```rust
// This System accesses two Queries, one for the Player Entity, 
// and one for the Enemy Entity.
fn player_and_enemy_access(
    player_query: Single<&Transform, With<Player>>,
    enemy_query: Single<&Transform, With<Enemy>>
) {
    println!("Player Location: {:?}", player_query.translation);
    println!("Enemy Location: {:?}", enemy_query.translation);
}

// While this System accesses a Resource.
fn access_resource(custom_resource: Res<CustomResource>) {
    println!("Custom Resource Value: {:?}", custom_resource.value);
}
```

> If two systems do access the same data, as long as one system isn't *mutably* accessing the data then both systems could run in parallel.

Reviewer 3: They can even be parallel if they don't access the same data at all :p
```suggestion
Systems can run in parallel, as long as one system isn't *mutably* accessing the same data as the other system.
```
